According to chapter 10 of the Practical Handbook of Multi-Tiered Systems of Support, “there are always barriers and facilitators to change.  Through the recognition of these factors, organizations can put into place steps to reduce barriers and strengthen the facilitators.  Advancing of the concepts of exploration, adoption and installation, through professional learning so educators can grasp an understanding of the MTSS model and the processes involved is the key to ensuring that the MTSS is systematic, procedural and effective within a school district. To establish deadlines that do not promote these concepts will result in an unaligned, nonsensical delivery of the MTSS model that will ultimately result in lack of student achievement through the SST process across the district.  The MTSS framework must move through each step with a directionality towards student success.  As the chairperson, I would find it of utmost importance to create an administrative mandate that would put into place a delivery system of the MTSS model throughout the district that ensured legal mandates were aligned to the districts process at the same time ensuring compliance with the MTSS model was also a priority.
Through professional learning, it would be advanced that the MTSS is a framework not a program.
The function of the Exploration Stage is a critical starting place for work with the school district.  Taking the time for exploration will save the school district valuable time and money and improves the chances for success.  During Exploration, readiness will be assessed by an MTSS Implementation Team which will be created to ensure systematic, procedural, effective goals are priority.  To the extent the organization is not ready, the Implementation Team will be created and accountable for helping create readiness of the MTSS program through the district and schools across the district; elementary, middle and high grade bands. This will ensure success in the adoption phase when the MTSS is disseminated through the district to the schools hence not moving too quickly.
As chapter 10 explains “adoption refers to the formal decision by a school board or committee to use a specific program or set of practices. Ideally, school boards or committees adopt to instructional programs after very careful review.  But as I have acknowledged, the MTSS model is a framework not a program and adoption must imply the necessary resources of the framework for effectiveness.
The function of the Installation Stage is to acquire or repurpose the resources needed to do the work ahead to stay cognizant of the goal of not moving too quickly and once again ensuring that the MTSS is systematic, procedural and effective.  Through the professional learning, the selection of staff, identifying sources for training and coaching, providing initial training for staff, finding or establishing performance assessment (fidelity) tools, locating office space, assuring access to materials and equipment, and so on are among the resources that need to be in place before the work can be done effectively and will be supported through established professional learning teams developed though the professional learning. During the Exploration Stage Implementation Teams help organizations recognize the need for these resources and during the Installation Stage Implementation Teams help organizations secure the needed resources to do the work ahead and prepare staff for the new practices.
