Think of an innovation that has been implemented within the past three years in your district or building.  How well has the execution of this innovation addressed the stages of change (exploration, adoption, installation, and implementation)?  To what extent have Fixsen et al.’s Change Implementation Components been considered?
The innovation that has been implemented in Atlanta Public Schools within the past three years is the Local School Governance also known as “The Go Teams”. On September 25, 2015, the State Board of Education voted unanimously to approve the Atlanta Public Schools charter system application during its state board meeting. Atlanta Public Schools became the 33rd school system in Georgia to achieve Charter System status.
A charter system is a school district that operates under a performance-based contract between the local board and the state board of education. Under the Charter System operating model, Atlanta Public Schools gained freedom and flexibility from many state education laws and regulations in exchange for increased accountability for student achievement. Additionally, the charter system distributed meaningful decision-making authority to individual schools by maximizing school-level governance through local school governance teams.
Through the exploration phase, readiness of the Go Team model was assessed through engagement sessions.  Through these APS sessions, parents, students, employees, and community members learned more about APS’ Charter System Model and was able to provide feedback.
Through the adoption phase, a “road map for chapter system application was developed which was a three phase system which addressed recommended approach development, application development, and operations.  An “APS charter system application timeline and activities” was also developed to formally address the decision by the APS school board or committee to become a charter school system.
“Board updates” addressed the acquisition of the resources needed to do the work ahead.  From August 2014 to December 2015, “Board updates” addressed Operating Models for School system flexibility options, Advisory Committee Reports, to Charter System and Cluster planning.  Assuring access to materials and equipment, and so on are among the resources that need to be in place before the work can be done effectively according to Fixsen was done with fidelity.
Implementation inclusive to the initial phase, and implementation schedule, and long term implementation (which is currently still an active phase) was done with careful planning and support.  Atlanta Public School began operating under a 5-yer contract in July 2016. The Go Teams began to meet over the summer of 2016 and meet monthly.
