The neighborhood was sparse in resources, overpopulated with citizens in poverty and barren in hope. There was one college in the entire city, known mostly for the engineering program. But in a town of poverty and little hope, the college mostly catered to students from other areas. Very few people in the neighborhood, applied to the college and even less were accepted to attend. Family was a staple in the neighborhood. Family members looked out for one another, at all times and in all circumstances. When the neighborhood experienced a series of robberies, it was family who sought to protect and notify one another. The houses were small , damaged from years of hurricanes and foundations were failing. However, the people of the neighborhood protected the little they did have and sought to maintain what they could. The people were poor, starving for opportunity and equality. The education offered in the city was even worst. Teachers only cared about pay, not about the welfare of the students or their life after high school. This trickled down to the students , who were grow into adults with little hope and no skills to apply to the one college in the neighborhood. The cycle of poverty was endless. The absence of hope continued to fester. One monument in the neighborhood was the store: Family Dollar. Despite the lack of income, one could find a Family Dollar store on nearly every major street. In turn, this created jobs. The jobs were very low pay, about nine dollars hourly, but the creation of jobs did deter crime to some extent. The burglaries of the homes lessened as neighborhood criminals began to target the slew of Family Dollar stores popping up everywhere. There was a positive side to this change, although robbery is never okay. The fact that stores were now being targeted, Family Dollar being a large corporation, attracted more police presence to the neighborhood. Patrols became more frequent. Police would be seen standing outside of the new neighborhood staple, Family Dollar. This created a sense of safety and reduction in crime. Although, the police were there to protect the corporation , the neighborhood benefited from the increase in police presence. The employees were able to retain their jobs with the comfort of increased police protection and safety. The people of the neighborhood have embraced a heightened sense of community. The houses are beginning to be renovated , as a result of more police officers being hired and the subsequent increase in jobs. The family Dollar stores are paying more to their employees, as retention is their focus. And most importantly, high school graduates in the neighborhood have embraced the idea of higher education. They have began to apply to the one college in the neighborhood, accepting financial assistance to do so. However, this is a great change. The college in the neighborhood catered more towards students from other areas, as it was very expensive and required academic skills that students in the neighborhood lacked. Now, the schools have a plan to place more graduates into the local college and increase enrollment, retention and graduation of their own.
