The unemployed, unable to provide for themselves, turned to begging, theft, or starvation. Bellamy responded to this problem by placing all workers and all work under one system, so each worker would always be employed. This eliminated the hardship of unemployment the workers of Bellamy's day would have had to face. Bellamy also eliminated household work in order to improve the efficiency of his society.
Because of the necessity of this work, many woman had a hard time taking care of a household and being employed simultaneously.
This allowed women to join the industrial army and increase the productive power of the nation. Through his focus on efficiency, Bellamy simultaneously streamlined the consumption, employment and household work systems.
	The economic value Bellamy emphasized the most in his society was equality, which was a reaction to the wealth inequality of his time. Bellamy's system of equal wages, mentioned above, was far different from the reality of the 1800's. Bellamy uses a parable of a coach, with some riding in it and some pulling it, to represent 1800's wealth inequality, in which the majority of people lived difficult, impoverished, unhappy lives, while a few prospered. Bellamy remedied the gap in prosperity by establishing equal wages in his society, regardless of a person's skill or rank. This wage was also extended to those unable to work. In the 1800's from which Bellamy wrote, caring for a family member with a physical or mental disability would have been financially draining.
Along with equal wages for all, the people in Bellamy's society were given fully equal opportunities in life. In the 1880's wealth and privilege were often inherited an unobtainable for those of the lower class. Education, in particular, was available mostly to only the upper class, preventing lower classes from working in many careers requiring education. Bellamy's reaction to this was to make education, including law and medical training, free and available to all people. By making education accessible to everyone, Bellamy ensured that all his citizens would have the opportunity to do whatever work they pleased, which was unheard of in the 1880's, when "professional" jobs like medicine and law were reserved only for the upper class. Through his emphasis of equality, Bellamy addressed some of the most major economic problems facing the time period he wrote from.
	Bellamy focused his novel on the economic systems of his utopic society because he believed that if the prevalent economic issues were solved, the other aspects of society would be perfect. If, in his society, the working conditions, inefficiency, and inequality of the economic system were corrected, Bellamy believed that all of the moral and social problems would also be cured. Bellamy wrote this in response to the economic turmoil of the 1880's, in which labor strikes and poverty were common even while the rich prospered. By solving only these economic issues, Bellamy hoped to create a fully functioning utopia.
